docs(Cockpit): add new federation documentation for Cockpit - int-add-observability-federate-doc (#5179)
scaleway/docs-content: pages/cockpit/how-to/federate-scaleway-metrics.mdx

content:
  h1: How to federate Scaleway metrics with your own Prometheus
  paragraph: Learn how to retrieve your Scaleway metrics with federation and reuse them within your own Prometheus with this step-by-step guide.
tags: federation cockpit metrics observability monitoring prometheus
categories:
  - observability
dates:
  validation: TBD
  posted: TBD
---

In this page, we will show you how to federate your Scaleway metrics using the `/federate` endpoint of your Scaleway datasources with a [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) configuration.

<Macro id="requirements" />

 - A Scaleway account logged into the [console](https://console.scaleway.com)
 - [Owner](/iam/concepts/#owner) status or [IAM permissions](/iam/concepts/#permission) allowing you to perform actions in the intended Organization
 - [Created](/cockpit/how-to/create-token/) a Cockpit token with read access in the same region as the metrics data source
 - A running [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) instance

<Message type="info">
  The `/federate` endpoint will not be billed during the beta phase. After the beta, the endpoint will incur additional costs.
</Message>

> Prometheus federation is usefull to gather all or your metrics in a unique Prometheus insance, or downsampling your different metrics to reduce the storage used by your metrics.

Reviewer: typos: "is useful“ (one "l") + missing t in instance.  Rewording suggestion: "Prometheus federation can be used to gather all your metrics in a unique Prometheus instance, or to downsample different metrics to reduce storage costs in the long run."

Since you have full control over your Prometheus instance, you can also use federation to increase metrics retention.

## Configure your Prometheus

Create a `prometheus.yml` file to configure your Prometheus instance, using the example below.
Make sure you replace `$SCW_DATASOURCE_URL` with the URL of your data source. The URL can be found under the "API URL" section in the [Data sources tab](https://console.scaleway.com/cockpit/dataSource) of the Scaleway console. Replace `$SCW_READ_TOKEN` with your Cockpit token with read permissions.

```yaml
global:
  scrape_interval: 3m

scrape_configs:
  - job_name: 'federate-scaleway-metrics'
    honor_labels: true
    metrics_path: '/federate'
    http_headers:
      X-Token:
        values:
          - '$SCW_READ_TOKEN'
    params:
      'match[]':
        - '{__name__="instance_server_cpu_seconds_total"}'
        - '{region="fr-par"}'
    static_configs:
      - targets:
        - '$SCW_DATASOURCE_URL'
```

<Message type="important">
  Do not include `https://` in the `SCW_DATASOURCE_URL`.
</Message>

Modify the different `match[]` parameters according to the metrics you want to retrieve. In this example, you will federate:

>   - All metrics called `instance_server_cpu_seconds_total`

Author: Yes we can modify the example to show a regex

---
meta:
  title: How to federate Scaleway metrics with your own Prometheus

>   description: Learn how to retrieve the Scaleway product metrics with federation to re-use them within your own Prometheus

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  description: Learn how to retrieve your Scaleway product metrics with federation and reuse them within your own Prometheus with this step-by-step guide.
```

content:
  h1: How to federate Scaleway metrics with your own Prometheus

>   paragraph: Learn how to retrieve the Scaleway product metrics with federation to re-use them within your own Prometheus using Scaleway's comprehensive guide. This tutorial covers retrieving your Scaleway product metrics by federation of your Cockpit datasources and retrieving those metrics within Prometheus.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  paragraph: Learn how to retrieve your Scaleway product metrics with federation and reuse them within your own Prometheus with this step-by-step guide.
```

> tags: federation cockpit metrics observability monitoring prometheus

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
tags: federation cockpit metrics prometheus
```

Reviewer 3: I think we can keep "monitoring" and maybe remove "observability"? since there's no "Observability" section anymore

categories:
  - observability
dates:

>   validation: TBD

Reviewer 3: Yes, taken into account

  posted: TBD
---

In this page, we will show you how to federate your Scaleway product metrics using the `/federate` endpoint of your Scaleway datasources with a [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) configuration.

<Macro id="requirements" />

 - A Scaleway account logged into the [console](https://console.scaleway.com)
 - [Owner](/iam/concepts/#owner) status or [IAM permissions](/iam/concepts/#permission) allowing you to perform actions in the intended Organization
 - [Created](/cockpit/how-to/create-token/) a Cockpit token with read access in the same region as the metrics data source

>  - [Created](/iam/how-to/create-api-keys/) an API key and retrieved your API secret key

Reviewer: why do you need an API key ? (only if we want to create the token from Scw API ?)

Author: Bad copy paste !

 - A running [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) instance

<Message type="info">

>   The `/federate` endpoint will not be charged during beta phase but please note that after the beta

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  The `/federate` endpoint will not be billed during the beta phase. After the beta, the endpoint will incur additional costs.
```

</Message>

<Message type="important">

>   - Federating Scaleway product metrics is a billable feature. Refer to the [product pricing](https://www.scaleway.com/en/pricing/?tags=available,managedservices-observability-cockpit) page for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Federating Scaleway product metrics is a billable feature. Refer to the [product pricing](https://www.scaleway.com/en/pricing/?tags=available,managedservices-observability-cockpit) page for more information.
```

</Message>

## Configure your Prometheus

Create a `prometheus.yml` file to configure your Prometheus instance, using the example below.

> Make sure to replace `$SCW_DATASOURCE_URL` with the URL of your data source (you can find it under the "API URL" section in the [Data sources tab](https://console.scaleway.com/cockpit/dataSource) of the Scaleway console) and to replace `$SCW_READ_TOKEN` with your Cockpit token with read permissions.

Author: It might be better to have a non-restrictive turn of phrase imo, if it works with both, lets just say with the URL of the datasource

```yaml
global:
  scrape_interval: 60s

scrape_configs:
  - job_name: 'federate-scaleway-metrics'
    honor_labels: true
    metrics_path: '/federate'
    http_headers:
      X-Token:
        values:
          - '$SCW_READ_TOKEN'
    params:

>       'match[]':

Reviewer: shall we not use real scw metrics as examples ? Picking one or two products ?

        - '{__name__="my-scaleway-metrics"}'
        - '{job="my-wanted-job"}'
    static_configs:
      - targets:
        - '$SCW_DATASOURCE_URL'
```

<Message type="info">
  Please note that you should not include `https://` in the `SCW_DATASOURCE_URL`
</Message>

> 

Reviewer: Shall we add a small explanatory paragraph on the scrape interval here ? explaining what it is and guidelines (> 1minutes, esp. if they're federating scw data that has 1 or 5mn intervals). 
And if they scrape every minute a metric that is only available every 5minutes they will have repeated metric points no ? What happens in that case ?

Modify the different `match[]` parameters according to the metrics you want to retrive, in this example you will federate:
  - All metrics called `my-scaleway-metrics`
  - All metrics with the label `job` with the value `my-wanted-job`

## Run your Prometheus instance

> Once you have configured your `prometheus.yml` file, you can use docker-compose to run your Prometheus instance with the configuration, and start federating Scaleway product metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you have configured your `prometheus.yml` file, you can use docker-compose to run your Prometheus instance with the configuration and start federating Scaleway product metrics.
```

> 1. Create a `docker-compose.yml` file with :

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create a `docker-compose.yml` file with:
```
